Add docs on storing CI/CD build logs in Elastic (#1688)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/ci-cd-observability.asciidoc

.Contextual attributes of a Jenkins pipeline execution in Elastic Observability
image::images/jenkins-pipeline-context.png[Attributes of a Jenkins pipeline execution]

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-store-jenkins-logs]]
== Store Jenkins pipeline logs in Elastic

> Jenkins pipeline build logs can be sent through OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) to be stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins pipeline logs can be sent through OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) to be stored
```

in an observability backend alongside the traces of the pipeline builds and Jenkins health metrics.
Storing logs in an observability backend provides several benefits including:

* Better observability, monitoring, alerting, and troubleshooting of the Jenkins instance

> due to the unification of all the signals in the observability backend.

Reviewer: "due to" or "thanks to"?

* Better traceability and control of long term storage for builds so you can more easily
audit the Software Delivery Lifecycle.
* Better scalability and reliability of Jenkins by greatly reducing the quantity of data stored in

> Jenkins and limiting the well known file system performance of Jenkins when storing a large history of builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins and limiting the well known file system performance challenges of Jenkins when storing a large history of builds.
```

Reviewer: doen thanks

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-store-jenkins-logs-requirements-configuration]]
=== Requirements and configuration

Storing Jenkins pipeline logs in Elastic requires:

* Elastic Observability version 8.1 or higher.

> * The OpenTelemetry Protocol endpoint configured on the Jenkins OpenTelemetry integrationmust be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The OpenTelemetry Protocol endpoint configured on the Jenkins OpenTelemetry Plugin must be

```

Author: We should also update [the open source doc](https://github.com/jenkinsci/opentelemetry-plugin/blob/master/docs/build-logs.md#storing-jenkins-pipeline-logs-in-elastic-elastic-v81) to use "Plugin" instead of "integration".

Reviewer: done thanks

reachable from the Jenkins Agents (i.e. don't specify a localhost OTLP endpoint unless OpenTelemetry
collectors are also deployed on the Jenkins Agents).

> * When using OpenTelemetry Collectors, set up a logs pipeline in addition to the traces and metrics pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When using OpenTelemetry Collectors, set up a [logs pipeline](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#service) in addition to the traces and metrics pipelines.
```

I added an hyperlink to help readers understand that "logs pipelines" here are concepts of the OpenTelemetry Collector, not related to Jenkins pipelines.

To store pipeline logs in Elastic:

1. Navigate to the _OpenTelemetry_ section of Jenkins configuration screen.
2. Set the _OTLP Endpoint_.
3. Use the _Add Visualisation Observability Backend_ dropdown to select the *Elastic Observability* option.
4. Set the _Kibana base URL_.
5. Click the _Advanced_ button to choose a storage integration strategy.
There are two options for storing pipeline logs in Elastic Observability:
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs exclusively in Elastic*,
    which means logs will no longer be visible through the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana>> below.
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins*,
    which means you can view logs stored in Elastic on demand in the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins>> below.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Visualizing logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins is recommended with an Elasticsearch access can be enable from the Jenkins Controller. It provides continuity in the user experience continuing to render the logs in the Jenkins GUI and it enables verification of the Elasticsearch setup.
```

Author: >Visualizing logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins is recommended with an Elasticsearch access can be enable from the Jenkins Controller.

What are you trying to communicate in this sentence? Could it just be:

>Visualizing logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins is recommended.

Author: I attempted to make this clearer in https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/1688/commits/de6024a25bd751624d0cd55bce01bffab9c7ce32.

Reviewer: I like very much https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/commit/de6024a25bd751624d0cd55bce01bffab9c7ce32 , is it merged in this PR?

Author: Yes! https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/1688/files#diff-75b8ab84b7edfb289a7f2e7e392dd0b801189e321a0d66ac4c660befe5d4178bR196-R197

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana]]

> === Visualize logs in Kibana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Visualize logs exclusively in Kibana
```

The Jenkins OpenTelemetry provides turnkey pipeline log storage in Elasticsearch with visualization in Kibana.
The Jenkins pipeline build console will display a hyperlink to Kibana rather than displaying the logs on the page.

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-console.png[Jenkins Console Output page with link to view logs in Elastic Observability]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-console.png[Jenkins Console Output page with link to view logs in Elastic Observability, width=1000]
```

.Architecture for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs exclusively in Elastic

> image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-architecture.png[Architecture diagram for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs exclusively in Elastic]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-architecture.png[Architecture diagram for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs exclusively in Elastic, width=1000]
```

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins]]

> === Visualize in both Kibana and Jenkins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Visualize logs in both Kibana and Jenkins
```

Reviewer: As I added a line to recommend this setup "Visualize logs in both Kibana and Jenkins" over the setup "Visualize logs exclusively in Kibana", it may be better to switch the order in the docs and to first document "Visualize logs in both Kibana and Jenkins"

The Jenkins OpenTelemetry also provides pipeline log storage in Elasticsearch while enabling you to
either visualize the logs in Kibana or continue to display them through the Jenkins pipeline build console.

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-console.png[Jenkins Console Output page displaying both log contents and a link to view logs in Elastic Observability]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-console.png[Jenkins Console Output page displaying both log contents and a link to view logs in Elastic Observability, width=1000]
```

This more advanced setup requires connecting the Jenkins Controller to Elasticsearch with read permissions
on the `logs-apm.app` and preferably on the Metadata of the ILM policy of this index template
(by default it's the `logs-apm.app_logs-default_policy policy`).
Use "Validate Elasticsearch configuration" to verify the setup.

.Architecture for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs in both Elastic and Jenkins

> image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-architecture.png[Architecture diagram for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs in both Elastic and Jenkins]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-architecture.png[Architecture diagram for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs in both Elastic and Jenkins, width=1000]
```

* Better observability, monitoring, alerting, and troubleshooting of the Jenkins instance
thanks to the unification of all the signals in the observability backend.
* Better traceability and control of long term storage for builds so you can more easily
audit the Software Delivery Lifecycle.
* Better scalability and reliability of Jenkins by greatly reducing the quantity of data stored in
Jenkins and limiting the well known file system performance challenges of Jenkins when storing a large history of builds.

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-store-jenkins-logs-requirements-configuration]]
=== Requirements and configuration

Storing Jenkins pipeline logs in Elastic requires:

* Elastic Observability version 8.1 or higher.
* The OpenTelemetry Protocol endpoint configured on the Jenkins OpenTelemetry Plugin must be
reachable from the Jenkins Agents (i.e. don't specify a localhost OTLP endpoint unless OpenTelemetry
collectors are also deployed on the Jenkins Agents).
* When using OpenTelemetry Collectors, set up a https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#service[logs pipeline]
in addition to the traces and metrics pipelines.

To store pipeline logs in Elastic:

> 1. Navigate to the _OpenTelemetry_ section of Jenkins configuration screen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the _OpenTelemetry_ section of the Jenkins configuration screen.
```

2. Set the _OTLP Endpoint_.
3. Use the _Add Visualisation Observability Backend_ dropdown to select the *Elastic Observability* option.
4. Set the _Kibana base URL_.
5. Click the _Advanced_ button to choose a storage integration strategy.
There are two options for storing pipeline logs in Elastic Observability:
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins*,
    which means you can view logs stored in Elastic on demand in the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins>> below.
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs exclusively in Elastic*,
    which means logs will no longer be visible through the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana>> below.

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins]]
=== Visualize logs in both Kibana and Jenkins

> The Jenkins OpenTelemetry also provides pipeline log storage in Elasticsearch while enabling you to

Reviewer 2: Not a big deal, but we try to use attributes for product names when possible. You might consider replacing Elasticsearch with `{es}` and Kibana with `{kib}`. See https://github.com/elastic/docs/blob/master/shared/attributes.asciidoc#L211-L212.

Author: Thanks @bmorelli25 -- has the team (or another docs team) considered implementing tests that assert that contributors consistently using these attributes?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jenkins OpenTelemetry plugin also provides pipeline log storage in Elasticsearch while enabling you to
```

Reviewer 2: > Thanks @bmorelli25 -- has the team (or another docs team) considered implementing tests that assert that contributors consistently using these attributes?

No, but that's a great suggestion for the new docs system!

1. Navigate to the _OpenTelemetry_ section of the Jenkins configuration screen.
2. Set the _OTLP Endpoint_.
3. Use the _Add Visualisation {observability} Backend_ drop-down to select the *Elastic {observability}* option.
4. Set the _{kib} base URL_.
5. Click the _Advanced_ button to choose a storage integration strategy.
There are two options for storing pipeline logs in Elastic {observability}:
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins*,
    which means you can view logs stored in Elastic on demand in the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins>> below.
    * *Store pipeline logs in Elastic and visualize logs exclusively in Elastic*,
    which means logs will no longer be visible through the Jenkins UI.
    Read more in <<ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana>> below.

Visualizing logs both in Elastic and through Jenkins is recommended because it provides a more seamless user experience
by continuing to render the logs in the Jenkins UI while allowing you to verify the {es} setup.

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins]]
=== Visualize logs in both {kib} and Jenkins

> The Jenkins OpenTelemetry Plugin also provides pipeline log storage in {es} while enabling you to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jenkins OpenTelemetry Plugin provides pipeline log storage in {es} while enabling you to
```

> either visualize the logs in {kib} or continue to display them through the Jenkins pipeline build console.

Reviewer: @colleenmcginnis Is the phrasing "either" suggest that it's an exclusive option? It would be misleading as both visualizations are possible.

Author: Is this clearer to you? 

```suggestion
visualize the logs in {kib} and continue to display them through the Jenkins pipeline build console.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-console.png[Jenkins Console Output page displaying both log contents and a link to view logs in Elastic {observability}, width=1000]

This more advanced setup requires connecting the Jenkins Controller to {es} with read permissions
on the `logs-apm.app` and preferably on the Metadata of the {ilm-init} policy of this index template

> (by default it's the `logs-apm.app_logs-default_policy policy`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(by default it's the `logs-apm.app_logs-default_policy` policy).
```

Use "Validate {es} configuration" to verify the setup.

.Architecture for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs in both Elastic and Jenkins
image::images/ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana-and-jenkins-architecture.png[Architecture diagram for storing pipeline logs in Elastic and visualizing logs in both Elastic and Jenkins, width=1000]

[discrete]
[[ci-cd-visualize-logs-kibana]]
=== Visualize logs exclusively in {kib}

> The Jenkins OpenTelemetry Plugin provides turnkey pipeline log storage in {es} with visualization in {kib}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simpler setup doesn't require to access {es} from the Jenkins Controller. In such case, the Jenkins pipeline build console no longer displays the logs but just an hyperlink to the {kib} logs visualization screen.
```

Author: How about something like this? 

```suggestion
Visualizing logs exclusively in {kib} involves a simpler setup that doesn't require access
to {es} from the Jenkins Controller. This is because the Jenkins pipeline build console
displays a hyperlink to the {kib} logs visualization screen instead of displaying the logs
in the Jenkins UI.
```

> The Jenkins pipeline build console will display a hyperlink to {kib} rather than displaying the logs on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
